PEP 667: Add impact on exec() (#3845)
python/peps: peps/pep-0667.rst

This approach is not without its drawbacks, which are covered
in the Backwards Compatibility section below.

Specification
=============

Python API
----------

The ``frame.f_locals`` attribute
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

For module and class scopes (including ``exec()`` and ``eval()``
invocations), ``frame.f_locals`` is a direct
reference to the local variable namespace used in code execution.

For function scopes (and other :term:`optimized scopes <py3.13:optimized scope>`)
it will be an instance of a new write-through proxy type that can directly modify
the optimized local variable storage array in the underlying frame, as well as the
contents of any cell references to non-local variables.

The view objects fully implement the ``collections.abc.Mapping`` interface,
and also implement the following mutable mapping operations:

* using assignment to add new key/value pairs 
* using assignment to update the value associated with a key
* conditional assignment via the ``setdefault()`` method
* bulk updates via the ``update()`` method

Using ``del``, ``pop()`` or ``clear()`` to remove keys that correspond to local

> variables on the underlying frame is NOT supported.

Reviewer: @markshannon The previous wording here looks like it was correct, as 3.13.0 isn't allowing even extra variables to be removed, and `.pop()` and `.clear()` don't exist on the frame proxy instances:

```
>>> import sys
... def g():
...     a = 1
...     yield sys._getframe().f_locals
...
>>> gen = g()
>>> live_locals = next(gen)
>>> live_locals
{'a': 1}
>>> live_locals["b"] = 2
>>> live_locals
{'a': 1, 'b': 2}
>>> del live_locals["b"]
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<python-input-8>", line 1, in <module>
    del live_locals["b"]
        ~~~~~~~~~~~^^^^^
TypeError: cannot remove variables from FrameLocalsProxy
>>> hasattr(live_locals, "pop")
False
>>> hasattr(live_locals, "clear")
False
```

I'll reword this again to *allow* implementations to support deleting extra variables (so we can change it in CPython, as I agree the status quo seems overly restrictive).

Reviewer: Tangent: I encountered https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/125723 while checking this behaviour.

Reviewer: Updated wording has been pushed. I'm not fond of declaring something to still be implementation defined, but compared to the previous situation, restricting that to only `del f_locals["extra_var"]`, `f_locals.pop("extra_var")`, and what happens when calling `f_locals.clear()` is still a big step forward (and I don't think we want to commit to the current state of CPython in this area as being the way that things *should* be).

Reviewer: OK, my confusion above was due to assuming that this was something that had already been changed, when it's actually something that was reported as a bug in 3.13.0 and is in the process of being fixed (see https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/125590).

So, what this bit actually needs to say:

* `.clear()` is outright not supported (since it isn't clear what it should do with local variables, omitting it forces the consuming code to make its own choices)
* `del` and `.pop()` *are* supported, but raise `ValueError` for actual local variable keys

Reviewer: OK, I think what I just pushed covers this correctly now (I also added links to the bug report and associated PR in the implementation notes section)

The ``locals()`` function will act the same as it does now for class
and modules scopes. For function scopes it will return an instantaneous
snapshot of the underlying ``frame.f_locals`` rather than implicitly
refreshing a single shared dictionary cached on the frame object.

Implementation Notes
====================

When accepted, the PEP text suggested that ``PyEval_GetLocals`` would start returning a
cached instance of the new write-through proxy, while the implementation sketch indicated
it would continue to return a dictionary snapshot cached on the frame instance. This
discrepancy was identified while implementing the PEP, and
`resolved by the Steering Council <https://github.com/python/steering-council/issues/245#issuecomment-2179005461>`__
in favour of retaining the Python 3.12 behaviour of returning a dictionary snapshot
cached on the frame instance.

To avoid confusion when following the reference link from the Python 3.13 What's New
documentation, the PEP text has been updated accordingly.

During the discussions of the C API clarification, it also became apparent that the

> rationale behind ``locals()`` being updated to return independent snapshots in optimized

Reviewer 2: Do you think "optimized scopes" needs some additional definition or context?  It's terminology used often in the PEP but undefined.  Perhaps just add a link to [the glossary entry](https://docs.python.org/3.13/glossary.html#term-optimized-scope)?

Reviewer: Good idea, I'll add the cross-reference.

The ``locals()`` function will act the same as it does now for class
and modules scopes. For function scopes it will return an instantaneous
snapshot of the underlying ``frame.f_locals`` rather than implicitly
refreshing a single shared dictionary cached on the frame object.

> Implementation Notes

Reviewer: Fair point, I'll move it further down.

> Implementation Notes

Reviewer: The implementation notes section are now after the implementation section, and the top level section about PEP 709 compatibility is now a subheading under Backwards Compatibility.

I also changed the second "Implementation" heading to "Reference Implementation"

  update a single shared snapshot of the local variables
* make ``locals()`` return write-through proxy instances (similar
  to ``frame.f_locals``)
* make ``locals()`` return genuinely independent snapshots so that
  attempts to change the values of local variables via ``exec()``
  would be *consistently* ignored rather than being accepted in some circumstances

The last option was chosen as the one which could most easily be explained in the
language reference, and memorised by users:

* the ``locals()`` builtin gives an instantaneous snapshot of the local variables in
  optimized scopes, and read/write access in other scopes; and
* ``frame.f_locals`` gives read/write access to the local variables in all scopes,
  including optimized scopes

This approach allows the intent of a piece of code to be clearer than it would be if both
APIs granted full read/write access in optimized scopes, even when write access wasn't
needed or desired. For additional details on this design decision, refer to :pep:`558`,
especially the :ref:`pep-558-motivation` section and :ref:`pep-558-exec-eval-impact`.

This approach is not without its drawbacks, which are covered

> in the Backwards Compatibility section below.

Reviewer: Missing pieces to get the PR merged:

- [ ] agreement from @markshannon that enough of the PR content has been moved over to PEP 558 for the rest to be acceptable (and what should be removed if the PR is still too big)
- [ ] confirmation from the SC that they're happy the missing impact assessment has now been added

Reviewer 3: The SC is happy with the new text and has no suggestions or requests for any additional changes.

Reviewer: Given the SC approval, I filed an issue for adding the hard deprecation to `PyEval_GetLocals()` for 3.14: https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/125170

Specification
=============

> Python API changes

Reviewer: I think most of the text is already written that way, so I should be able to move the comparison to the old behaviour later in the doc without having to reword the descriptions of the new behaviour too much.

> Python API changes

Reviewer: This has been split into two sections: "Specification" (most of the existing text) and "Summary of Changes" (the examples that compared the old-and-new behaviour, as well as any text along those lines).

------------------

The ``frame.f_locals`` attribute
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

For module and class scopes (including ``exec()`` and ``eval()``
invocations), ``frame.f_locals`` will continue to be a direct
reference to the local variable namespace used in code execution.

For function scopes (and other optimized scopes) it will be an instance
of a new write-through proxy type that directly modifies the optimized
local variable storage array in the underlying frame, as well as the
contents of any cell references to non-local variables.

The view objects fully implement the ``collections.abc.Mapping`` interface,
and also implement the following mutable mapping operations:

* using assignment to add new key/value pairs 
* using assignment to update the value associated with a key
* conditional assignment via the ``setdefault()`` method
* bulk updates via the ``update()`` method

> Removing keys with ``del``, ``pop()`` or ``clear()`` is NOT supported.

Reviewer: Ah, cool, I had wondered about that. I'll reword this accordingly.

  snapshot of the local variables in optimized scopes, and
  read/write access in other scopes" and "``frame.f_locals``
  gives read/write access to the local variables in all scopes,
  including optimized scopes" allows the intent of a piece of
  code to be clearer than it would be if both APIs granted
  full read/write access in optimized scopes, even when write
  access wasn't needed or desired
* in addition to improving clarity for human readers, ensuring
  that name rebinding in optimized scopes remains lexically
  visible in the code (as long as the frame introspection APIs
  are not accessed) allows compilers and interpreters to apply
  related performance optimizations more consistently
* only Python implementations that support the optional frame
  introspection APIs will need to provide the new write-through
  proxy support for optimized frames

This approach is not without its drawbacks, which are covered
in the Backwards Compatibility section below.

Specification
=============

Python API changes
------------------

The ``frame.f_locals`` attribute
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

``frame.f_locals`` will return a view object on the frame that

> implements the ``collections.abc.MutableMapping`` interface.

Reviewer: I think this is a case of people (including me), reading what we expect to see rather than what was actually there! :)

> implements the ``collections.abc.MutableMapping`` interface.

Reviewer 4: This is incorrect. It should implement the `Mapping` interface. It may be mutable, but it is not a fully mutable mapping. You can't delete some values, and string are supported as keys.

Author: Hmm, that's not the current situation either. The current implementation does not allow *any* deletion from the object. It also supports all kinds of keys per your [request](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/115153#pullrequestreview-2026982160) : ) .

Personally, I believe it's nicer to only support pure strings (we do have an open [issue](https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/120906) about this, allowing other types is kind of a mess for the locals proxy). Originally it was implemented that way because the PEP says so, but if we are editing the PEP, should we reconsider that decision? If we still support all types of keys, we need to answer the issue mentioned - what happens if something that looks like a string got passed in?

Reviewer: After checking at the 3.14 interactive prompt, I moved this paragraph to a clearer location and changed it to say:

```
The view objects fully implement the ``collections.abc.Mapping`` interface,
and also implement the following mutable mapping operations:

* using assignment to add new key/value pairs 
* using assignment to update the value associated with a key
* conditional assignment via the `setdefault()` method
* bulk updates via the `update()` method

Removing keys with `del` statements or the `pop()` method is NOT supported.
```

The first three could be simplified to `item assignment (including via the setdefault() method)`, but calling out addition and rebinding separately seemed worthwhile (since they're genuinely different proxy operations)

With this PEP both examples would print ``2`` as the function level
change would be written directly to the optimized local variables in
the frame rather than to a cached dictionary snapshot.

There are no compensating advantages for the current behavior;
it is unreliable and slow.

The ``locals()`` builtin has its own undesirable behaviours, where
adding a new local variable can change the behaviour of code
executed with ``exec()`` in function scopes, even if that code
runs *before* the local variable is defined.

For example::

    def f():
        exec("x = 1")
        print(locals().get("x"))
    f()

prints ``1``, but::

    def f():
        exec("x = 1")
        print(locals().get("x"))
        x = 0
    f()

prints ``None`` (the default value from the ``.get()`` call).

With this PEP both examples would print ``None``, as the call to
``exec()`` and the subsequent call to ``locals()`` would use
independent dictionary snapshots of the local variables rather
than using the same shared dictionary cached on the frame object.

Rationale
=========

Making the ``frame.f_locals`` attribute a write-through proxy
-------------------------------------------------------------

> The current implementation of ``frame.f_locals`` returns a dictionary

Reviewer 2: "current" could be ambiguous in the future when read with historical context.  Five years from now, what does "current" mean?  Could you be more explicit?

that is created on the fly from the array of local variables. The
``PyFrame_LocalsToFast()`` C API is then called by debuggers and trace
functions that want to write their changes back to the array (until
Python 3.11, this API was called implicitly after every trace function
invocation rather than being called explicitly by the trace functions).

This can result in the array and dictionary getting out of sync with
each other. Writes to the ``f_locals`` frame atribute may not show up as
modifications to local variables if ``PyFrame_LocalsToFast()`` is never
called. Writes to local variables can get lost if the dictionary snapshot

> is not refreshed before being written back to the frame.

Author: I was a bit confused here. I thought writes to local variables get lost if the snapshot *is* refreshed before being written back to the frame. So if you do `exec("x = 1")` then `locals()` (to refresh the snapshot), your `x=1` is lost?

By making ``frame.f_locals`` return a view on the
underlying frame, these problems go away. ``frame.f_locals`` is always in
sync with the frame because it is a view of it, not a copy of it.

Making the ``locals()`` builtin return independent snapshots
------------------------------------------------------------

When ``exec`` was converted from a statement to a builtin function
in Python 3.0 (part of the core language changes in :pep:`3100`), the
associated implicit call to ``PyFrame_LocalsToFast()`` was removed, so
it typically appears as if attempts to write to local variables with
``exec`` in optimized frames are ignored::

    >>> def f():
    ...     x = 0
    ...     exec("x = 1")
    ...     print(x)
    ...     print(locals()["x"])
    ...
    >>> f()
    0
    0

In truth, the writes aren't being ignored, they just aren't
being copied from the dictionary cache back to the optimized local

> variable array. The changes to the dictonary are then overwritten

Reviewer 2: s/dictonary/dictionary/

the next time the dictionary cache is refreshed from the array::

    >>> def f():
    ...     x = 0
    ...     locals_cache = locals()
    ...     exec("x = 1")
    ...     print(x)
    ...     print(locals_cache["x"])
    ...     print(locals()["x"])
    ...
    >>> f()
    0
    1
    0

The behaviour becomes even stranger if a tracing function

> or another piece of code invokes ``PyLocals_ToFast()`` before

Author: Is `PyLocals_ToFast()` a thing?

Reviewer: Nope, I just have a mental shorthand for `PyFrame_LocalsToFast()` that sometimes escapes through my fingers when typing.

> the cache is next refreshed, as in those cases the change *is*

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: s/refreshed, as in/refreshed; in/

  including optimized scopes" allows the intent of a piece of
  code to be clearer than it would be if both APIs granted
  full read/write access in optimized scopes, even when write
  access wasn't needed or desired
* that clarity of intent allows optimizing compilers and
  interpreters to assume all local variable rebindings are
  visible in the code, even when ``locals()`` is accessed
  or the default arguments are used in APIs like ``exec()``
  and ``eval()`` (optimization in this case refers to code
  specialisation and other more advanced techniques, not
  the basic optimization of replacing string dict lookups
  with array index lookups - the latter feature is always
  enabled in optimized scopes). Deoptimization will only
  be needed when a write-through proxy instance is used to
  modify a local variable. In a sufficiently sophisticated
  interpreter, the deoptimization impact could potentially
  be limited only to optimizations involving the modified
  variable, but even less sophisticated interpreters will
  be able to postpone frame deoptimization until at least
  one local variable is modified outside of the normal flow

>   of code execution.

Reviewer 5: I don't have any particular quibble with this bullet point, but to me it feels too far afield from this PEP to be speculating about possible compiler/interpreter optimizations. It just doesn't seem necessary to make the case.

Reviewer: Keeping bindings visible in the code was definitely part of the rationale, and optimising compilers were one of the intended beneficiaries (human readers being the other).

I agree it feels out of place here, though. Maybe I can simplify the benefit of visible rebinding to something like "This improves clarity when reading code, and allows compilers and interpreters to more consistently apply additional performance optimizations in optimized scopes".

No need to get into the nitty gritty of interpreters implicitly reverting to less aggressive optimizations when hidden rebinding becomes a runtime concern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ensuring name rebinding in optimized scopes remains visible in the code (as long as the frame introspection APIs are not accessed) improves clarity for human readers and allows compilers and interpreters to apply related performance optimizations more consistently.
```

Reviewer: I changed this bullet point to the following:

```
* in addition to improving clarity for human readers, ensuring
  that name rebinding in optimized scopes remains lexically
  visible in the code (as long as the frame introspection APIs
  are not accessed) allows compilers and interpreters to apply
  related performance optimizations more consistently
```

being copied from the dictionary cache back to the optimized local
variable array. The changes to the dictonary are then overwritten
the next time the dictionary cache is refreshed from the array::

    >>> def f():
    ...     x = 0
    ...     locals_cache = locals()
    ...     exec("x = 1")
    ...     print(x)
    ...     print(locals_cache["x"])
    ...     print(locals()["x"])
    ...
    >>> f()
    0
    1
    0

The behaviour becomes even stranger if a tracing function
or another piece of code invokes ``PyLocals_ToFast()`` before
the cache is next refreshed, as in those cases the change *is*
written back to the optimized local variable array::

    >>> from sys import _getframe
    >>> from ctypes import pythonapi, py_object, c_int
    >>> _locals_to_fast = pythonapi.PyFrame_LocalsToFast
    >>> _locals_to_fast.argtypes = [py_object, c_int]
    >>> def f():
    ...     _frame = _getframe()
    ...     _f_locals = _frame.f_locals
    ...     x = 0
    ...     exec("x = 1")
    ...     _locals_to_fast(_frame, 0)
    ...     print(x)
    ...     print(locals()["x"])
    ...     print(_f_locals["x"])
    ...
    >>> f()
    1
    1

>     1

Reviewer: I didn't want to get into it in the PEP itself, but here's a fun headscratcher for you: in Python 3.12, if you delay retrieving `_frame.f_locals` until after the exec+PyFrame_LocalsToFast calls, the local variables don't get updated. If you retrieve it beforehand, they get updated, even if you immediately drop the reference and get a new one afterwards.

Late `f_locals` retrieval:

```
>>> def f():
...     _frame = _getframe()
...     x = 0
...     print(locals()["x"])
...     exec("x = 1")
...     _locals_to_fast(_frame, 0)
...     print(x)
...     print(locals()["x"])
...     print(_frame.f_locals["x"])
...
>>> f()
0
0
0
0
```

Early `f_locals` retrieval:

```
>>> def f():
...     _frame = _getframe()
...     x = 0
...     print(_frame.f_locals["x"])
...     exec("x = 1")
...     _locals_to_fast(_frame, 0)
...     print(x)
...     print(locals()["x"])
...     print(_frame.f_locals["x"])
...
>>> f()
0
1
1
1
>>>
```

I'm genuinely not sure what is going on there, since `PyEval_GetLocals()` should be implicitly populating `frame.f_locals` so it has a borrowed reference to return.

in optimized scopes will allow reliable modification of local variables and
nonlocal cell references).

C API compatibility
-------------------

PyEval_GetLocals
''''''''''''''''

``PyEval_GetLocals()`` has never historically distinguished between whether it was
emulating ``locals()`` or ``sys._getframe().f_locals`` at the Python level, as they all
returned references to the same shared cache of the local variable bindings.

With this PEP, ``locals()`` changes to return independent snapshots on each call for
optimized frames, and ``frame.f_locals`` (along with ``PyFrame_GetLocals``) changes to
return new write-through proxy instances.

Because ``PyEval_GetLocals()`` returns a borrowed reference, it isn't possible to update
its semantics to align with either of those alternatives, leaving it as the only remaining
API that requires a shared cache dictionary stored on the frame object.

While this technically leaves the semantics of the function unchanged, it no longer allows
extra dict entries to be made visible to users of the other APIs, as those APIs are no longer
accessing the same underlying cache dictionary.

> Accordingly, the function will be marked as soft-deprecated in Python 3.13, and subsequently

Reviewer: Makes sense, I'll reword this bit.

> Accordingly, the function will be marked as soft-deprecated in Python 3.13, and subsequently

Reviewer: Moved to the specification section, changed to "deprecated in the documentation" and "emit DeprecationWarning" to avoid the soft vs hard deprecation jargon.

As with all functions that return a borrowed reference, care must be taken to
ensure that the reference is not used beyond the lifetime of the object.

Impact on ``exec()``
====================

> Even though this PEP does not modify ``exec()`` directly, the semantic change

Reviewer 6: Thanks for the first pass at trying to document this behavior. I would suggest reframing this a bit to:
- Call out the specific semantic change to `locals()` to give the reader context
- Explain concisely how this PEP impacts or explicitly documents why a behavior change may be seen when using `exec()` with performance optimized `locals().`
- Make clear the expected behavior before explaining the examples.

Author: For the semantic changes to `locals()`, it's mentioned in this PEP a bit earlier. We should assume the reader already reads that part right? How should I either refer back or summarize that?

The reason of the behavior change is basically

> The core difference is that the current implementation returns the same dict
when ``locals()`` is called multiple times in function scope, so the following
code magically works

About the expected behavior, do you mean something like "the local variable update will not be propagated between `exec()`"? I feel difficult to describe the exact behavior otherwise I would probably just summarize it in words instead of examples. This is a rather subtle change and the original behavior is kind of odd. I would love any help from people who are better at documentation.

Reviewer 5: @willingc I feel that these concepts are pretty well communicated by the current draft, with my suggested changes incorporated. First the current behavior of `exec()` is explained (with an example), then the reason for that behavior (and the connection to `locals()` is explained, then some additional confusing implications of the current behavior are shown (with an example), and then the new behavior is explained (which doesn't take very long, since it's much simpler), and then examples are given to demonstrate how to accomplish some things that are currently possible, under the new behavior. Are there particular aspects of this presentation that you don't find sufficiently clear?

Reviewer 6: Thanks @carljm. Let's accept your suggestions, and I will give it another read. I'm primarily concerned that the expected behavior for 3.13+ is clear to readers. That may be so after your changes are included. I have a hard time following the wording flow until I see it as one prose document.

Reviewer: After my Discord comments about even PEP 558 not explaining the locals() changes particularly well, I went back to PEP 558, the related python-dev thread, and even PEP 3100 to find the material that actually went into the decision to make locals() and exec() work as PEP 558 and PEP 667 both propose.

The early iterations of PEP 558 actually tried to standardise ``locals()`` without changing it, so hopefully the new text makes it clear why that approach didn't last long :)

Reviewer: I believe the current PR text covers @willingc's concerns (please review again if I'm mistaken about that)

to ``locals()`` impacts the behavior of ``exec()``.

``exec(object)`` has been equivalent to ``exec(object, globals(), locals())``

> for a long time, but it's not officially documented. We plan to keep this

Reviewer: I reworded this paragraph to note that the docs aren't clear on this point, rather than suggesting that they don't say anything at all.

relation, which means existing code using ``exec()`` will see some different
behaviors.

The core difference is that the current implementation returns the same dict
when ``locals()`` is called multiple times in function scope, so the following
code magically works::

    def f():
        exec('a = 0')  # equivalent to exec('a = 0', globals(), locals())
        exec('print(a)')  # equivalent to exec('print(a)', globals(), locals())
        print(locals())  # {'a': 0}

>         # However, print(a) will not work here

Author: Is it common to backtick code in the comments? None of the other code pieces in this PEP does that.

>         # However, print(a) will not work here

Reviewer 5: I don't feel strongly about the backticks; feel free to ignore them. I feel they help visually set aside the code, but it's good to be consistent with the style in the rest of the PEP.

>         # However, print(a) will not work here

Reviewer: I stuck with the "no backticks in the code comments" approach in my edits (I find it hard enough to remember to use double backticks in ReST docs even without adding that extra little bit of potential confusion!)

    f()

``locals()`` is implicitly used as a scope shared between multiple ``exec()``.

This behavior gets harder to predict when the code in ``exec()`` tries to write
to an existing local variable::

    def f():
        a = None
        exec('a = 0')  # equivalent to exec('a = 0', globals(), locals())
        exec('print(a)')  # equivalent to exec('print(a)', globals(), locals())
        print(locals())  # {'a': None}
    f()

``print(a)`` will print ``None`` because the implicit ``locals()`` call in

> ``exec()`` refreshes the cached dict with the actual values on the frame.
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
``exec()`` refreshes the cached dict with the actual values on the frame.
So "real" locals, unlike "fake" locals created via ``exec()``, can't be modified
by ``exec()``.

```

Reviewer: "can't easily be modified by ``exec()``" (they can be modified, if a trace function calls `PyEval_LocalsToFast()` behind the scenes. That used to happen implicitly on every line when a trace function was installed, but the responsibility for it was moved to the trace functions themselves in Python 3.11: https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/86363)

> With the semantic changes to ``locals()``, it's easier to explain the behavior

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
With the semantic changes to ``locals()`` in this PEP, it's easier to explain the behavior
```

code magically works::

    def f():
        exec('a = 0')  # equivalent to exec('a = 0', globals(), locals())
        exec('print(a)')  # equivalent to exec('print(a)', globals(), locals())
        print(locals())  # {'a': 0}
        # However, print(a) will not work here
    f()

``locals()`` is implicitly used as a scope shared between multiple ``exec()``.

This behavior gets harder to predict when the code in ``exec()`` tries to write
to an existing local variable::

    def f():
        a = None
        exec('a = 0')  # equivalent to exec('a = 0', globals(), locals())
        exec('print(a)')  # equivalent to exec('print(a)', globals(), locals())
        print(locals())  # {'a': None}
    f()

``print(a)`` will print ``None`` because the implicit ``locals()`` call in
``exec()`` refreshes the cached dict with the actual values on the frame.
So "real" locals, unlike "fake" locals created via ``exec()``, can't easily be
modified by ``exec()``.

With the semantic changes to ``locals()`` in this PEP, it's easier to explain the behavior
of ``exec()`` - it will never affect local function scopes. Any assignment
to the local variables will be discarded when ``exec()`` returns.

> However, you can still achieve the wanted behavior with explicit scopes::

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
However, you can still achieve the wanted behavior with explicit namespaces::
```

    def f():
        scope = {}
        exec('a = 0', locals=scope)
        exec('print(a)', locals=scope)
    f()

> You can even change the variables in the local scope by explicitly using
> ``frame.f_locals`` which is not possible before::

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can even change the variables in the local scope by explicitly using
``frame.f_locals``, which was not possible before::
```

As with all functions that return a borrowed reference, care must be taken to
ensure that the reference is not used beyond the lifetime of the object.

Impact on ``exec()``
====================

Even though this PEP does not modify ``exec()`` directly, the semantic change
to ``locals()`` impacts the behavior of ``exec()``.

``exec(object)`` has been equivalent to ``exec(object, globals(), locals())``

> for a long time, but it's not officially documented. We plan to keep this

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
for a long time, but it was not officially documented. We plan to keep this
```

Reviewer: I reworded this paragraph (the old behaviour was documented, but the docs aren't especially clear about it)

relation, which means existing code using ``exec()`` will see some different
behaviors.

> The core difference is that the current implementation returns the same dict

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The core difference is that the current implementation returns the same dict
```
```suggestion
The core difference exists in function scope. The current implementation returns the same dict
```

when ``locals()`` is called multiple times in function scope, so the following
code magically works::

    def f():
        exec('a = 0')  # equivalent to exec('a = 0', globals(), locals())
        exec('print(a)')  # equivalent to exec('print(a)', globals(), locals())
        print(locals())  # {'a': 0}
        # However, print(a) will not work here
    f()

> ``locals()`` in a function currently returns the same persisted dict for every call. This allows stashing

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
``locals()`` in a function currently returns the same persisted dict for every call. The persisted dict allows stashing
```

Reviewer: Paragraph has been reworded.

> extra "fake locals" in that dict, which aren't real locals known by the compiler, but can still be seen in

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
extra "fake locals", which are values that aren't real locals known by the compiler. These "fake locals" can be seen in
```

Reviewer: I reworded this paragraph in a way that I think covers this, so please readd the comment if it still applies.

``locals()`` and shared between multiple ``exec()`` in the same function scope.

> This behavior gets harder to predict when the code in ``exec()`` tries to write

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When code in ``exec()`` tries to write
```

Reviewer: The order of these clauses has been reversed (as suggested).

> to an existing local variable::

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
to an existing local variable, this behavior gets harder to predict::
```

Reviewer: The order of these clauses has been reversed (as suggested).

    def f():
        a = None
        exec('a = 0')  # equivalent to exec('a = 0', globals(), locals())
        exec('print(a)')  # equivalent to exec('print(a)', globals(), locals())
        print(locals())  # {'a': None}
    f()

``print(a)`` will print ``None`` because the implicit ``locals()`` call in
``exec()`` refreshes the cached dict with the actual values on the frame.

> So "real" locals, unlike "fake" locals created via ``exec()``, can't easily be

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
So "real" locals known by the compiler, unlike "fake" locals created via ``exec()``, can't easily be
```

Reviewer: Adopted a variation on this here: https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3845/files#r1652020650

modified by ``exec()``.

With the semantic changes to ``locals()`` in this PEP, it's easier to explain the behavior

> of ``exec()`` - it will never affect local function scopes. Any assignment

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
of ``exec()``. ``exec()`` will never affect local function scopes. Any assignment
```

Reviewer: Reworded this paragraph.

to the local variables will be discarded when ``exec()`` returns.

> However, you can still achieve a shared namespace across `exec()` calls with explicit namespaces::

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A shared namespace across `exec()` calls can still be achieved with explicit namespaces::
```

Reviewer 6: This change should fix the linting error roo.

Reviewer: Adopted this change.

all changes to the underlying variables, by any means, including the
addition of new variable names as mapping keys, will always be visible.

``locals()`` compatibility
''''''''''''''''''''''''''

``locals() is locals()`` will be ``False`` for optimized frames, so
code like the following will raise ``KeyError`` instead of returning
``1``::

    def f():
        locals()["x"] = 1
        return locals()["x"]

To continue working, such code will need to explicitly store the namespace
to be modified in a local variable, rather than relying on the previous
implicit caching on the frame object::

    def f():
        ns = {}
        ns["x"] = 1
        return ns["x"]

While this technically isn't a formal backwards compatibility break
(since the behaviour of writing back to ``locals()`` was explicitly
documented as undefined), there is definitely some code that relies
on the existing behaviour. Accordingly, the updated behaviour will
be explicitly noted in the documentation as a change and it will be
covered in the Python 3.13 porting guide.

To work with a copy of ``locals()`` on all versions without making
redundant copies on Python 3.13+, a helper function will need to

> be defined in the affected code::

Reviewer 2: And by "affected code", do you mean "optimized scopes"?

    if sys.version_info >= (3, 13):
        def _ensure_func_snapshot(d):
            return d # 3.13+ locals() already returns a snapshot
    else:
        def _ensure_func_snapshot(d):
            return dict(d) # Create snapshot on older versions

    def f():
        ns = _ensure_func_snapshot(locals())
        ns["x"] = 1
        return ns

In other scopes, ``locals().copy()`` can continue to be called
unconditionally without introducing any redundant copies.

Impact on ``exec()`` and ``eval()``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Even though this PEP does not modify ``exec()`` or ``eval()`` directly,
the semantic change to ``locals()`` impacts the behavior of ``exec()``
and ``eval()`` as they default to running code in the calling namespace.

While the exact wording in the library reference is not entirely explicit,
both ``exec()`` and ``eval()`` have long used the results of calling
``globals()`` and ``locals()`` in the calling Python frame as their default
execution namespace.

This was historically also equivalent to using the calling frame's
``frame.f_globals`` and ``frame.f_locals`` attributes, but this PEP maps

> them to ``globals()`` and ``locals()`` in order to preserve the property

Reviewer 2: "them" is ambiguous.  Does it refer to `frame.f_globals` and `frame.f_locals` or the arguments to `exec()` and `eval()`?

of ignoring attempted writes to the local namespace by default.

However, as noted above for ``locals()``, this change has an additional
effect: each ``exec()`` call in an optimized scope will now run in a
*different* implicit namespace rather than a shared one. Furthermore,
separately calling ``locals()`` will also return a different namespace.

This poses a potential compatibility issue for some code, as with the

> current implementation returning the same dict when ``locals()`` is called

Reviewer 2: As above, "current" may be ambiguous when read some time in the future.

With ``locals()`` in an optimised scope returning the same shared dict for each call,
it is possible to store extra "fake locals" in that dict. While these aren't real
locals known by the compiler (so they can't be printed with code like ``print(a)``),
they can still be accessed via ``locals()`` and shared between multiple ``exec()``
calls in the same function scope. Furthermore, because they're *not* real locals,
they don't get implicitly updated or removed when the shared cache is refreshed
from the local variable storage array.

When the code in ``exec()`` tries to write to an existing local variable, the
runtime behaviour gets harder to predict::

    def f():
        a = None
        exec('a = 0')  # equivalent to exec('a = 0', globals(), locals())
        exec('print(a)')  # equivalent to exec('print(a)', globals(), locals())
        print(locals())  # {'a': None}
    f()

``print(a)`` will print ``None`` because the implicit ``locals()`` call in
``exec()`` refreshes the cached dict with the actual values on the frame.
This means that, unlike the "fake" locals created by writing back to ``locals()``
(including via previous calls to ``exec()``), the real locals known by the

> compiler can't easily be modified by ``exec()``.

Reviewer 2: "easily" or at all?  What would "difficult" code look like?

> As noted in the Motivation section, this confusing side effect happens even if the

Reviewer 2: "Motivation" -> add a back reference link?

local variable is only defined *after* the ``exec`` calls::

    >>> def f():
    ...     exec("a = 0")
    ...     exec("print('a' in locals())") # Printing 'a' directly won't work
    ...     print(locals())
    ...     a = None
    ...     print(locals())
    ...
    >>> f()
    False
    {}
    {'a': None}

> Because ``a`` is a real local variable, it gets removed from ``locals()`` when

Reviewer 2: I had to read this paragraph a few times for it to make sense.  I can't think of a better way to rephrase it, but just wanted to point out my confusion on a first read.

Reviewer: I had a go at rewording it (including pointing out that the behaviour is necessary to make `locals()` correctly reflect `del` statements in optimized scopes)

Reviewer 2: Thanks, I think the rewording helps!

        print(a)  # 0
    f()

The behavior of ``exec()`` and ``eval()`` for module and class scopes (including
nested invocations) is not changed, as the behaviour of ``locals()`` in those
scopes is not changing.

Impact on other code execution APIs in the standard library
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

``pdb`` and ``bdb`` use the ``frame.f_locals`` API, and hence will be able to
reliably update local variables even in optimized frames. Implementing this
PEP will resolve several longstanding bugs in these modules relating to threads,
generators, coroutines, and other mechanisms that allow concurrent code execution
while the debugger is active.

Other code execution APIs in the standard library (such as the ``code`` module)
do not implicitly access ``locals()`` *or* ``frame.f_locals``, but the behaviour
of explicitly passing these namespaces will change as described in the rest of
this PEP (passing ``locals()`` in optimized scopes will no longer implicitly
share the code execution namespace across calls, passing ``frame.f_locals``
in optimized scopes will allow reliable modification of local variables and

> nonlocal cell references)

Reviewer 2: Missing trailing period.

        print(locals())  # {'a': 0}
        # However, print(a) will not work here
    f()

With ``locals()`` in an optimised scope returning the same shared dict for each call,
it is possible to store extra "fake locals" in that dict. While these aren't real
locals known by the compiler (so they can't be printed with code like ``print(a)``),
they can still be accessed via ``locals()`` and shared between multiple ``exec()``
calls in the same function scope. Furthermore, because they're *not* real locals,
they don't get implicitly updated or removed when the shared cache is refreshed
from the local variable storage array.

When the code in ``exec()`` tries to write to an existing local variable, the
runtime behaviour gets harder to predict::

    def f():
        a = None
        exec('a = 0')  # equivalent to exec('a = 0', globals(), locals())
        exec('print(a)')  # equivalent to exec('print(a)', globals(), locals())
        print(locals())  # {'a': None}
    f()

``print(a)`` will print ``None`` because the implicit ``locals()`` call in
``exec()`` refreshes the cached dict with the actual values on the frame.

> So "real" locals, unlike "fake" locals created via ``exec()``, can't easily be
> modified by ``exec()``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that, unlike the "fake" locals created by writing back to ``locals()``
(including via previous calls to ``exec()``), the real locals known to the
compiler can't easily be modified by ``exec()``.
```

Change based on https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3845#discussion_r1649281520

``f_locals`` to modify local variables, will now work correctly,
even in the presence of threaded code, coroutines and generators.

``frame.f_locals`` compatibility
--------------------------------

Although ``f.f_locals`` behaves as if it were the namespace of the function,
there will be some observable differences.
For example, ``f.f_locals is f.f_locals`` will be ``False`` for optimized

> frames, as each access to the atribute produces a new write-through proxy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
frames, as each access to the attribute produces a new write-through proxy
```

instance.

However ``f.f_locals == f.f_locals`` will be ``True``, and
all changes to the underlying variables, by any means, including the
addition of new variable names as mapping keys, will always be visible.

``locals()`` compatibility
''''''''''''''''''''''''''

``locals() is locals()`` will be ``False`` for optimized frames, so
code like the following will raise ``KeyError`` instead of returning
``1``::

    def f():
        locals()["x"] = 1
        return locals()["x"]

To continue working, such code will need to explicitly cache the namespace

> being modified in a local variable, rather than relying on the implicit
> caching on the frame object::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
being modified in a local variable, rather than relying on the previous
implicit caching on the frame object::
```

    def f():
        ns = locals()
        ns["x"] = 1
        return ns["x"]

This isn't formally a backwards compatibility break (since the behaviour of
writing back to ``locals()`` was explicitly documented as undefined),
but it will still be explicitly noted in the documentation as a change,
and covered in the Python 3.13 porting guide.

Impact on ``exec()`` and ``eval()``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    ...     exec("a = 0")
    ...     exec("print('a' in locals())") # Printing 'a' directly won't work
    ...     print(locals())
    ...     a = None
    ...     print(locals())
    ...
    >>> f()
    False
    {}
    {'a': None}

Because ``a`` is a real local variable, it gets removed from ``locals()`` when
it hasn't been bound yet, rather than being left alone like an entirely unknown
name.

As noted above in the Rationale section, the above behavioural description may be
invalidated if the CPython ``PyFrame_LocalsToFast()`` API gets invoked while the frame
is still running. In that case, the changes to ``a`` *might* become visible to the
running code, depending on exactly when that API is called.

With the semantic changes to ``locals()`` in this PEP, it becomes much easier to explain the
behavior of ``exec()`` and ``eval()`` in optimized scopes: they will never implicitly affect
local variables in optimized scopes. Any assignment to the local variables will be discarded
when the code execution API returns, since a fresh copy of the local variables is used on each
invocation.

A shared namespace across ``exec()`` calls can still be obtained by using explicit namespaces

> rather than relying on the implicitly shared frame namespace::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rather than relying on the previously implicitly shared frame namespace::
```

    def f():
        ns = {}
        exec('a = 0', locals=ns)
        exec('print(a)', locals=ns)
    f()

You can even reliably change the variables in the local scope by explicitly using
``frame.f_locals``, which was not possible before (even using ``ctypes`` to
invoke ``PyFrame_LocalsToFast`` was subject to the state inconsistency problems
discussed elsewhere in this PEP)::

    def f():
        a = None
        exec('a = 0', locals=sys._getframe().f_locals)
        print(a)  # 0
    f()

The behavior of ``exec()`` and ``eval()`` for module and class scopes (including
nested invocations)  is not changed, as the behaviour of ``locals()`` in those
scopes is not changing.

Impact on other code execution APIs in the standard library
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

> ``pdb`` and ``bdb` use the ``frame.f_locals`` API, and hence will be able to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``pdb`` and ``bdb`` use the ``frame.f_locals`` API, and hence will be able to
```

reliably update local variables even in optimized frames. Implementing this
PEP will resolve several longstanding bugs in these modules relating to threads,
generators, coroutines, and other mechanisms that allow concurrent code execution
while the debugger is active.

Other code execution APIs in the standard library (such as the ``code`` module)
do not implicitly access ``locals()`` *or* ``frame.f_locals``, but the behaviour
of explicitly passing these namespaces will change as described in the rest of

> this PEP (passing ``locals()`` in optimized scopes will no longer implicitly
> share the code execution namespace, passing ``frame.f_locals`` in optimized
> scopes will allow reliable modification of local variables and nonlocal cell
> references)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this PEP (passing ``locals()`` in optimized scopes will no longer implicitly
share the code execution namespace across call, passing ``frame.f_locals``
in optimized scopes will allow reliable modification of local variables and
nonlocal cell references)
```

C API compatibility
-------------------

PyEval_GetLocals
''''''''''''''''

``PyEval_GetLocals()`` has never historically distinguished between whether it was
emulating ``locals()`` or ``sys._getframe().f_locals`` at the Python level, as they all
returned references to the same shared cache of the local variable bindings.

With this PEP, ``locals()`` changes to return independent snapshots on each call for
optimized frames, and ``frame.f_locals`` (along with ``PyFrame_GetLocals``) changes to
return new write-through proxy instances.

Because ``PyEval_GetLocals()`` returns a borrowed reference, it isn't possible to update
its semantics to align with either of those alternatives, leaving it as the only remaining
API that requires a shared cache dictionary stored on the frame object.

While this technically leaves the semantics of the function unchanged, it no longer allows
extra dict entries to be made visible to users of the other APIs, as those APIs are no longer
accessing the same underlying cache dictionary.

Accordingly, the function will be marked as deprecated, with a target removal date of

> Python 3.15 (two releases after Python 3.13), and alternatives recommended as described below.

Reviewer: This is the only hard deprecation I think the PEP really needs.

`PyEval_GetGlobals` and `PyEval_GetBuiltins` are only a problem due to PEP 703's general issues with borrowed references, rather than causing problems for PEP 667.

        return ns["x"]

While this technically isn't a formal backwards compatibility break
(since the behaviour of writing back to ``locals()`` was explicitly
documented as undefined), there is definitely some code that relies
on the existing behaviour. Accordingly, the updated behaviour will
be explicitly noted in the documentation as a change and it will be
covered in the Python 3.13 porting guide.

To work with a copy of ``locals()`` on all versions without making
redundant copies on Python 3.13+, a helper function will need to
be defined in the affected code::

    if sys.version_info >= (3, 13):
        def _ensure_func_snapshot(d):
            return d # 3.13+ locals() already returns a snapshot
    else:
        def _ensure_func_snapshot(d):
            return dict(d) # Create snapshot on older versions

    def f():
        ns = _ensure_func_snapshot(locals())
        ns["x"] = 1
        return ns

In other scopes, ``locals().copy()`` can continue to be called
unconditionally without introducing any redundant copies.

Impact on ``exec()`` and ``eval()``
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Even though this PEP does not modify ``exec()`` or ``eval()`` directly,

> the semantic change to ``locals()`` impacts the behavior of ``exec()``,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
the semantic change to ``locals()`` impacts the behavior of ``exec()``
```

        goto error_handler;
    }

When ``PyEval_GetLocals()`` is being used as an equivalent to calling
``sys._getframe().f_locals`` in Python, it should be replaced by calling
``PyFrame_GetLocals()`` on the result of ``PyEval_GetFrame()``.

In these cases, the original code should be replaced with::

>     frame = PyEval_GetFrame();

Reviewer: We do that in the replacement above, where the intent is to emulate the `locals()` builtin. This replacement is for emulating `sys._getframe().f_locals`.

I'll add comment lines to both replacement examples noting that difference in behaviour.

Comparison with PEP 558
=======================

This PEP and :pep:`558` shared a common goal:
to make the semantics of  ``locals()`` and ``frame.f_locals()``
intelligible, and their operation reliable.

The key difference between this PEP and :pep:`558` is that
:pep:`558` attempted to store extra variables inside a full
internal dictionary copy of the local variables in an effort
to improve backwards compatibility with the legacy
``PyEval_GetLocals()`` API, whereas this PEP does not (it stores
the extra local variables in a dedicated dictionary accessed
solely via the new frame proxy objects, and copies them to the
``PyEval_GetLocals()`` shared dict only when requested).

:pep:`558` did not specify exactly when that internal copy was

> updated by code execution and frame proxy operations, making
> the behavior of :pep:`558` impossible to reason about in some
> cases where this PEP remains well specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
updated, making the behavior of :pep:`558` impossible to reason
about in several cases where this PEP remains well specified.
```
